N AS                                                                     NASA TN D-2873


m
h
a0


     3
            N65-26260                                    iI
     h         (ACCESSION NUMUER)
                                             WHRUJ




ro
a
z
     +c
     L
          (NASA CR O R TMX O R AD NUMBER)
                                              /
                                                  ~l
                                            ~E~TEGORYI
                                             (&DE)       t




                                                                                             I
                                                       GPO PRICE
                                                       ff5Y/
                                                              PRICE(S1
                                                                         s
                                                                         s   ~Auz-           I
                                                                                             i
                                                                                             I




                                                         Hard copy (HC)

                                                         Microfiche (MF)




                                                                                             1
SEEDING CRITERION FOR NONEQUILIBRIUM                                                         1

MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC GENERATORS                                                               1


                                                                                             1
                                                                                             I




by Frederic A. Lyman und Eli Reshotko                                                        1



                                                                                             1




UATIUNAL AERONAUl1CS AffD SPACE AOlUltllSTRATtON          WASXI16TO11, 0. C.     IU#E 1961
                                                                                                 I
.




       SEEDING CRITERION FOR NONEQUILIBFUUM

         MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC GENERATORS

            By Frederic A. Lyman and E l i Reshotko

                           Lewis Research Center
                              Cleveland, Ohio




      NATIONAL AERONAUT ICs AND SPACE ADMlN ISTRATI ON
    For sale by the Clearinghouse for F e d e r a l Scientific and T e c h n i c a l Information
                                                          -
                       Springfield, V i r g i n i a 22151 P r i c e $3.00
           b


     .
                           SEEDING CRITERION FOR NONEQUILIBRIUM
                           MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC GENERATORS*
                             by Frederic A. Lyman and Eli Reshotko
                                     Lewis Research Center

                                           SUMMARY




         Calculations of the break-even condition for various noble carrier gases with alkali
    seed have been performed and are presented in graphical form. The results indicate
    that ion slip very strongly affects the break-even conditions. Generally speaking, seed-
    ing is desirable, and the most beneficial effects a r e obtained for heavy seed materials.

                                         INTRODUCTION                               k;lfM
       One of the key factors in obtaining high power density in magnetohydrodynamic
    (MHD)power generators is the achievement of high electric conductivity in the working

        "he principal results of this investigation were reported at the ASME Winter
I
    Annual Meeting, New York City, Nov. 29-Dec. 4, 1964. The present report is a con-
fluid. In closed-cycle electric-power systems where seeded combustion plasmas a r e
inapplicable, this problem is particularly severe because, at the highest working fluid
temperatures currently contemplated for nuclear reactors or heat exchangers, the equi-
librium electric conductivity of even a seeded gas is far below that required for a rea-
sonable power density. A nonequilibrium means of obtaining high electric conductivity
is accordingly of great interest.
      The contemporary studies of nonequilibrium conductivity began with that of Kerre-
brock (ref. 1). He considered the case of direct current gas discharges and showed that
the electron temperature, at which the energy received by electrons from the electric
field is balanced by that lost in collisions, can be considerably above the bulk gas tem-
perature. He has in fact demonstrated the results to be well represented by a theory
that assumes the ionization and recombination processes to be in equilibrium at the elec-
tron temperature s o that the electron population is that corresponding to equilibrium at
the electron temperature. The validity of Kerrebrockrs hypothesis has been established
for a cesium plasma by Ben Daniel and Tamor (ref. 2).
      Hurwitz, Sutton, and Tamor (ref. 3) noted that the electron heating effect might also
be obtained using the induced electric fields present in MHD generator channels. In
their paper, as in KerrebrockPs analysis, the electron temperature was determined by
balancing the energy gained by the electrons from the induced electric field with the en-
ergy lost by them in elastic collisions with the neutral atoms. They assumed that at the
low degrees of ionization attained in generators, the electron-ion collisions would occur
infrequently enough to be considered negligible.
      Reference 4 showed, however, that at the elevated electron temperatures resulting
from electron heating, a degree of ionization might be attained where the dominant proc-
ess for momentum and energy exchange is electron-ion collisions. This was found to be
particularly the case in noble gases displaying the Ramsauer effect. The addition of
easily ionizable seed to a carrier gas has the two effects of (a) increasing the electron
density of the working fluid and (b) increasing the electron energy losses through colli-
 sion with seed atoms and ions, thus limiting the electron temperature. The first effect
tends to augment the electric conductivity, while the second tends to decrease it. It was
 shown in reference 4 that in many cases for argon c a r r i e r gas with cesium seed the sec-
ond effect was predominant, causing an overall reduction in electric conductivity. In
 fact, it was recommended in reference 4 that argon be used without seed as the working
 fluid i n an MHD generator. This result is, however, sensitive to the values of the per-
tinent collision cross sections. The correct calculation of the electrical conductivity
 depends on the average rate of momentum transfer in collisions, which in turn requires
 the averaging of the momentum transfer rate over the velocity distributions of the col-
 liding particles. In the previous investigations (refs. 1, 3, and 4), a value of the mono-
 energetic cross section corresponding to the average electron energy was chosen, which

2
is tantamount to ignoring the distribution of electron velocities. Furthermore, the prior
investigations did not quantitatively consider the effect of the presence of both seed and
carrier gas ions on ion slip.
     It is the purpose of the present report t o examine in an orderly manner the various
consequences of the addition of seed to a c a r r i e r gas, including the aforementioned
effects, and to establish a criterion to determine whether seed addition augments o r de-
creases the power density. The formulated criterion may be separately applied to each
successive station of a segmented electrode Faraday generator. The formulation is
given in general terms and may be used for arbitrary combinations of monatomic carrier
and seed materials.



                                          ANALY S IS

     The criterion mentioned in the INTRODUCTION will now be obtained. The basic
idea is to determine the condition for which the addition of a vanishingly small amount of
seed either increases or does not change the power density (power generated per unit
volume). The condition for which the power density is unchanged by the addition of seed
will be called the break-even point.



                                       Basic Equations

        In reference 4, Ohm's law and the electron energy equation are derived, including
the effect of ion slip, for a slightly ionized gas containing only one type of ion (ions of the
c a r r i e r gas). In the present report, it is necessary to include both c a r r i e r gas ions
(c+) and seed ions (s+). (Symbols are defined in appendix A. ) The details of the deriva-
tion are given in appendix By where it is shown that all the basic equations of reference 4
still apply, provided that the definition of the ion-neutral collision frequency via is
appropriately modified (see eq. (B19)).
        The energy balance equation for the electrons is (ref. 4)


                                                           2
                                    J 2 = 3 -e2k6 (Te - TINe
                                            mC


where J is the current density, e is the electron charge, k is the Boltzmann constant,
mc is the mass of an atom of the carrier gas, Te is the electron temperature, T is
the static gas temperature, and Ne is the number density of electrons. The factor 6,
which is sometimes called the mean loss factor, is a dimensionless quantity defined for

                                                                                               3
                                                                \



elastic collisions as




where the subscript t denotes each species of atom or ion that may be present, and vet
is the average collision frequency for momentum transfer between the electrons and
species t. The collision frequency is written




where ( ve) is the average thermal speed of the electrons




and Qet, the average cross section for momentum transfer, is




                         ( )9 lm
             Qet( Te ) = 3- -me
                            2kTe     v5Q
                                      e m(v e)exp ( g ) d v e       (t = i, a)    (C11)


The quantity Qm(ve) appearing in the integrand of equation (C11)is the momentum
transfer cross section for a monoenergetic beam of electrons of speed ve. Equation
(C11)is the result of averaging the rate of momentum transfer in collisions over the
velocity distributions of both the electrons and the species t of heavy particles (atoms
o r ions) in the manner described in appendix C. When the average momentum transfer
cross section is calculated from equation (C11)for any one of the noble gases for some
ranges of Te, the result is found to be as much as an order of magnitude larger than the
value of Qm at beam energies equal to kTe. The difference between Qec(Te) and
Qm is due to the large variation in Qm with ve for the noble gases displaying the
Ramsauer effect. (If Qm were independent of ve, this difference would not be signif-
icant, since in that case Qec(Te) = (4/3)Qm. ) Therefore, the use of the monoenergetic
cross section instead of the average c r o s s section, as was done in references 1, 3,
and 4, can lead to significant errors.

4
    For a segmented-electrode MHD generator, Ohm's law is (ref. 4)


                                  J=        "         uB(l - K)                        (5)
                                       1 + BeBi


where u is the gas velocity, B is the intensity of the magnetic field (Wb/sq m), and K
is the load parameter, which is the ratio of the actual voltage across the generator elec-
trodes to the open-circuit voltage,


                                             Kr-E
                                                      uB

    The conductivity uo is


                                                 - Neez
                                            OO   -q

where




is the total collision frequency for electrons. The electron Hall parameter Be is de-
fined as

                                          w
                                       B =-=-e - el3
                                        e        'e    meVe

where we is the electron cyclotron frequency. The parameter       pi is




where uia is the effective ion-neutral collision frequency. The value of Pi is a meas-
ure of the slip of the ions through the neutral gas. The ion slip varies inversely with the
gas density (through via) and directly with the magnetic field. The expression for via
is derived in appendix B (see eq. (B19)).


                                                                                          5
    The power density for the segmented electrode generator is 1



                             P = JE =   NeIF -               (Te         T) KuB


The seed fraction s, defined as


                                                     NO
                                            sr- S
                                                     %
is the parameter of main interest. The number densities of seed and c a r r i e r gases in
the absence of ionization a r e denoted as N: and                %,
                                                    respectively, where


                                        N i = Ns + N
                                                                 S+


                                        N0c = N c + N                +




                                                                 C


The degrees of ionization of the seed and carrier gas a r e

                                                        N
                                           x       5-
                                                            C+
                                               C




                                                        N S+
                                           x       r-
                                               s N OS

respectively.   The condition of charge neutrality is


     'This is equivalent to the conventional formula


                                          001.12B 2K(l - K)
                                    P=
                                                   14-Pepi


Equation (11) is more convenient for subsequent manipulations.

6
                              Ne = Ni = N      +   +N        = (xC+ SX,)~$               (17)
                                              S         C+


     It is assumed that the various ion and atom populations are in equilibrium with the
free electrons at the electron temperature Te. Then the Saha equations (eqs. (4) and (5)
of ref. 4) may be written for the seed as


                     (xc + sxs)xs    =--( 1
                                              2gs+      2nmekTe 3/2

                         1 - xs          NE gs               h2       )   e-(%)

and for the carrier gas as



                        1 - xc


where gs and gc are statistical weights for the ground states of the seed and c a r r i e r
atoms, respectively, g and g
                         +       are statistical weights of the ground states of the
                                      +




                        S            C
seed and carrier ions, respectively, and Vs and Vc are the first ionization potentials
of the seed and carrier gas, respectively.



                             Condition for Operation Without Seed

     The power density, current, conductivity, electron density, and temperature all
depend on the seed fraction s. Suppose that the generator is operating without seed
with a prescribed load parameter K, magnetic field By and gas velocity u. The prob-
lem is to determine the direction in which the power density varies when a small amount
of seed is added. For this the sign of dP/ds in the neighborhood of s = 0 must be de-
termined. When dP/ds = 0, the break-even condition will be attained, and this condi-
tion will require a certain relation between the operating parameters.
     With the aforementioned assumptions, the electric field E is fixed, and the frac-
tional change in the power density caused by the addition of seed is, from equation ( l l ) ,

                       -1- d_ _P ---l d J - --+---+--
                                             1 me        1        1   dTe    1 dd



    From equations (l), (5), and (7), it follows that for fixed K, u, and B

                                                                                              7
                                                                                           4




                                   2 + Pepi) 2'(Te - T)6 = const
                                  ve(l


Logarithmic differentiation of equation (21) gives


                   2                                         1     + - - = o1 d 6
                                                                 -dT-
                1 + Pep,                                 Te - T ds        6ds


Since ve, via, and 6 a r e known functions of s and Te(s), equation (22) may be used to
determine dTe/ds. Then the resulting expression for dTe/ds can be substituted into
equation (20) to yield an expression for dP/ds. The details of this derivation a r e given
in appendix D, where it is shown that dP/ds 2 0 if




                           2eVc




                                  L         G
                                                     C
                                                         (
                                                         3 + - 2eVc + A)]
                                                                kTe Te - T




The number n is simply the exponent in a semiempirical relation for the cross section
    -
Qec T: for scattering of electrons by c a r r i e r gas atoms. Typically, n is of the
order 1. The quantity \k, which is defined in equation (D18), is related to the differ-
ence in mobilities of the two ion species in the c a r r i e r gas.
     The aforementioned relation (eq. (23)) is derived for the limit of zero seed. It has
been assumed that as s approaches zero, the degree of ionization of the seed ap-
proaches one; hence, the ionization potential and cross section of the seed do not appear.
From equations (18) and (19), it can be shown that for s = 0, xs M 1 to a high degree of
approximation.
     The inequality (23) is an implicit relation between Te,       q,
                                                                    B, and T, which estab-
lishes a range of electron temperatures in which the power density is not increased by
seeding. It is not possible to obtain an explicit relation, because the various t e r m s of

8
equation (23) are not simple functions of Te. It is convenient for calculational purposes
t o assign NE, Te, and T and to calculate pepi, which is proportional to B2 For .
fixed values of Te and T, the limiting magnetic field is then calculated over the allow-
able range of gas densities  %.     From curves of B against NF, the break-even value
of I$corresponding to any given magnetic field may be found for prescribed values of
Te and T.
     The electron temperature is, of course, not an independent parameter, because it
depends on the rate of Joule heating through equation (1). Thus it is necessary to estab-
lish whether or not any prescribed electron temperature is actually attainable. The cri-
terion for this is the value of the gas velocity u required to produce a given electron
temperature. The required gas velocity is obtained from the relation



                        uB(l - K) =   :Gc     (1 + f l e p i ) v e i F


which follows from equations (l), ( 5 ) , and (7). (Note that 6 = 1 in the limit of zero
seed. ) Finally, the break-even condition is conveniently expressed as a family of
curves of uB(1 - K) against   %   for various values of B and T. In appendix E, a
sample calculation is given in order to clarify the details of the calculational procedure.



                               RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

    Although the break-even condition (the equality in relation (23)) is utilized in the
manner just described to obtain numerical results, it is of interest to consider the
simpler forms t o which it reduces in special cases so that the physical meaning of the
condition may become clearer.



                                       Zero Ion Slip

     A useful limiting case is that in which ion slip is neglected. Then Pi = 0, and the
right side of relation (23) must also be zero. The break-even condition for zero ion slip
is further simplified for small degrees of ionization. For this case (xc << 1 and
s = O), equation (19)may be written
where



                                                               eXP      (s)
From equations (3), (13), and (17), for xc << 1,


                                 -_---
                                 'ei - C       Qei        Qei
                                                     - xc -
                                 "ec    1 - xc Qec             Qec

Thus, for xc << 1 and s = 0, equation (23) yields the following quadratic equation for
the ratio vec/vei:




where


                                       a=2n+l+-     Te
                                                  Te - T



                         ( E):
b = 2 n + l + Te - 3 + 1 - -
             Te - T                     kTe
                                                                :r(+2 )
                                                               --         + T Te
                                                                              e-T   (29b)



                                                     +  T 2)
                                                  kTe Te - T


Break-even operation of course corresponds to the equality sign in the relation (28).
Since a and c a r e positive, equation (28) has only one positive root, namely,


                                              G   c        -        b
                                                      2a


The corresponding gas density is

10
I
                which is the gas density for break-even operation with zero ion slip. At higher gas
1
                densities, vec/vei > (vec/vei)lim, and inequality (28) is not satisfied. Hence, seeding
                increases the power density. At gas densities below (q)lim, seeding will decrease the
~
                power density. It is not difficult to understand why the ratio of collision frequencies is
                the critical parameter for break-even operation without seed. At gas densities larger
1               than that given by equation (31), electron-atom collisions account for most of the re-
                sistivity of the gas. According to equations (3), (7), and (8), the conductivity in that case
    1           is proportional to the degree of ionization. Seeding would then increase the degree of
    '           ionization and therefore improve the conductivity and power. At gas densities lower than
    l           break-even, where vei is much larger than uec, the conductivity becomes independent
                of the electron density and increases with the electron temperature. In this case, the
    1           addition of seed would lower the electron temperature (cf. eq. (D21))and consequently
                decrease the conductivity and power density more than could be offset by the ionization
                of the seed.
                      Equation (31) sets an upper limit on the gas density, above which the addition of seed
                will increase the power density. Strictly speaking, it is an implicit relation for
        I       inasmuch as the gas density also enters into Qei through the term In A (see eqs.
                (C19)and (C20)). Equation (31) is used in the following manner to establish the break-
                even condition for zero ion slip. The electron and gas temperatures are assigned, a
                value for In A between 5 and 10 is assumed, and (NE)lim is calculated from equa-
        '       tion (31). The value of In A is recomputed with this density, and the calculation is re-
                peated a few times until i t converges. The corresponding value of uB(l - K) is then
                calculated from equation (24). Appendix E contains a sample calculation.
                      The results of such a calculation are conveniently represented in a graph of the
                voltage uB(l - K) plotted against the gas density . :N    This form is convenient because
                the variation of the gas dynamic properties along a duct can easily be traced. For a
                constant velocity generator for which B and K are also constant, the state of the gas
                would be represented by a horizontal line, while a constant area generator with constant
                B and K would be represented on a log-log plot by a straight line of slope -1, since pu
                is constant. In general, K is not constant, and the generator operating curve is not
                straight, as will be seen subsequently.
                      The zero-ion-slip break-even condition for some of the noble gases is shown in fig-
                u r e 1, where the atomic mass of the seed is assumed to be equal to that of the c a r r i e r
            1   gas in order to reduce the number of parameters. For some combinations of gas and
            l
                seed such as argon and potassium or xenon and cesium, this is very nearly the case.

                                                                                                           11
                                                                                                       Helium




                  1011           I   I   lllllll              I      I   1   1   1    1   1   1        I   I    I 1 1 1 1 1 1

                   1022                           1023                       1024                                           1025
                                                   Gas density, Ng, atomslcu m

                           1         I   I   I I I Ill1              I       I       I I I ,111            I    I   I   I   I IIII
                          ,001                        . 01                                        .1                               1
                                                                  Gas pressure, atm
                         Figure 1. - Break-even curves for zero ion slip and equal atomic masses of carrier
                           gas and seed. Static gas temperature, 5Oo0 K.


When mS = mc, b = a - c and equation (30) becomes

                                                          C                           3
                                                                                                Te
                                                                    2n+1+
                                                                                              Te - T

since Qec/Qei   is usually of the order 10-3                       . Equation (32) can also be obtained quite
directly from the right side of equation (23) by setting mc = mS and xc = 0. From
equation (32), it is clear that the electron-ion and electron-atom collision frequencies
a r e of the same order at break-even.
      The break-even curves in figure 1 a r e for all practical purposes straight lines.
There is no obvious reason why this should be so, but it is most likely due to the fact
that the exponential variation of g(Te) in the formula for (No)       (eq. (31)) is much more
                                                                C lim
significant than the purely algebraic variation of the other terms. To the right Of any one
of these lines, NE > (NE)      , and the power density is increased by seeding, whereas
                           lim
12
                  loll          1       I   I I lllll        I       I   I       1 1 1 1 1 1        I   I   I       I       iIilJ
                   1ozL                             1023                                 IC?~                                    ld5
                                                     Gas density, N!, atomsku m

                           I        I       I   I I I Ill1       I           I     I I I Ill1           1       I       I    I   I I I J
                         .a31                           .01                                    .1                                          1
                                                 Gas pressure, atm
                          Figure 2. - Effect of seeding with material whose atomic mass is greater than that of
                            carrier gas. Argon; static gas temperature, C!@ K.



seeding decreases the power density to the left of the line.
     There is no easily discernible pattern in the location of the break-even curves for
different gases. It is evident from equations (31) and (26) that for a given electron tem-
perature           will increase exponentially with decreasing ionization potential and
varies as the inverse square of the cross section Qec. F’urthermore, uB(l - K) is
proportional to Qec, since in the present case ve vec(l + a/c). Therefore the break-
even curve for the gas with the lowest ionization potential should be closest to the lower
right corner of the graph. Unfortunately, for the noble gases a low ionization potential
does not go hand in hand with a low electron scattering cross section. In fact xenon,
which has the lowest ionization potential, has one of the highest cross sections. The
conflicting requirements on the ionization potential and cross section a r e responsible for
the location of the curves shown in figure 1.
     The obvious way to use the curves of figure 1 is to choose a particular gas and the
values of the operating parameters u, B, K, and I$and to decide whether seeding is
required by where the point representing the operating condition falls relative to the

                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                           ,




break-even curve. If the break-even curve is below the operating point, addition of seed
with atomic mass equal to that of the c a r r i e r gas will decrease the power density;
however, the addition of seed with atomic mass different from that of the c a r r i e r gas
may move the break-even curve to the other side of the operating point, which indicates
that such seed will increase the power density. Examination of equations (28) to (30)
shows that if the seed atoms a r e heavier than the c a r r i e r gas atoms, then the ratio
( ~ ~ ~ and      / (NZ)lim
                     v ~ ~a r e )decreased
                                    ~ ~ and    ~ the break-even curve is moved to the left.
This behavior may be accounted for by the behavior of the elastic loss factor 6 defined
by equation (2). If ms > mc, then the addition of seed decreases 6. Figure 2 illus-
strates this effect when argon (atomic weight, 39.944) is seeded with cesium (atomic
weight, 132.91).



                                       Effect of Ion Slip

     For pi # 0 the break-even condition is evaluated numerically, as described pre-
viously and i n appendix E. It is instructive to consider first the simplest case, where
both the atomic masses and the mobilities of the seed and c a r r i e r gas a r e equal. In this
case, the loss factor 6 is unchanged by the addition of seed; and the quantity       +,
representing the difference in ion mobilities, vanishes. The break-even condition
becomes




                        'e    'e            Te - T
               PePi =                                                           c              (33)
                                                     2eVc
                                   Te - T


When NE = (No)        as defined in equation (31), the numerator vanishes and pepi = 0.
               c lim:
Suppose that for a fixed Te, NE is continually decreased below (No)          It is clear
                                                                     c lim'
from equations (25) and (27) that the degree of ionization will then increase, as will the
ratio vei/vec.    Therefore, Pepi will increase with decreasing NE. (The t e r m contain-
ing xc in the denominator is generally of less importance for small xc. ) Physically,
the increase in Pepi is due to an increase in ion slip. Because of the lower gas density,
ion-neutral collisions become l e s s frequent, and the mechanism for extracting part of
the mechanical energy from the gas and using it to Joule heat the electrons becomes l e s s
effective. A s shown in figure 3, the effective electric field uB(l - K) required f o r elec-
tron heating is everywhere above that f o r pepi = 0, the difference between the curves
increasing as Pepi increases (see eq. (24)). This difference becomes large enough to

14
     .




                    104            I   1   I I I1111             1   I   I I I IIIl          1   I   l l l l l l l

                     1022                         1023                           1024                           lou
                                                      Gas density, N,: atDmslcu m

                             I         I    I   l l l l l l 1        I    1   I I I Ill1         I    I   I I IIIJ
                            .001                           .01                          .1                            1
                                                                 Gas temperature. atm
                            Figure 3. - Effect of ion slip on break-even curve for argon. Static gas temperature,
                              so00 K; ms = mc; equal ion mobilities.

turn the break-even curve upward at low density. The range of parameters over which
seeding is advantageous is increased, since dP/ds > 0 everywhere below the break-
even curve.
        For unequal atomic masses and mobilities of seed and c a r r i e r gases, the situation
changes markedly from that of the preceding example, because the variations of the loss
factor 6 and of the effective ion-neutral collision frequency via become appreciable.
This can be ascertained from the numerical magnitudes of the second and fourth terms
on the left side of equation (23), since eVc/kTe >> 1. Because the general break-even
condition is quite sensitive to the ratios of ion mobilities and atomic masses of the seed
and c a r r i e r , as well as to the cross section and ionization potential of the carrier, i t is
difficult to draw general conclusions from equation (23). Each combination of seed and
c a r r i e r must be considered separately. The results are shown in figures 4 to 9 for a
static gas temperature of 500' K (which is typical of supersonic generators) and for
various magnetic fields. Figure 4, for cesium-seeded argon, and figure 9, for cesium-
seeded helium, a r e of a different character than figures 5 to 8. The break-even curve

                                                                                                                          15
I



    .
    0
\




        17
                                                 4




                                                          s
                                                          c

                                                     F&
                                    '                     'CI
                                                          m
                                                          'I)

                                                          L3



                                             JM      8



     \
         \




             0                                   1
                     III I I   111,1,1   I   I       N

                                                 - 8
     4           3             N
                               0
                               A                  8




18
of figure 4 has an upper and a lower branch corresponding to high o r low electron tem-
peratures, respectively. In the regions above the upper branch and below the lower
branch, seeding decreases the power density, while between the branches seeding in-
creases the power density. The upper branch is similar to the curve of figure 3 and may
be interpreted physically in the same way. In the region below the lower curve, the
electron temperature is low and collisions of electrons with carrier gas atoms limit the
conductivity. The addition of very small amounts of seed changes the conductivity only
slightly, but because the seed ions are more mobile than ions of the c a r r i e r gas, seeding
causes ion slip to increase more rapidly than the conductivity, which causes the factor
o0/( 1 + Pepi) in the power density to decrease. Although seeding is not required in the
region below the lower branch, this region is of little practical significance because of
the low electron temperature and consequently the small degree of ionization and low
power density.
        The break-even curves of figures 5 to 8 have also two branches. The upper branch
corresponds to high electron temperatures and low gas densities (this branch is not
shown in figs. 5(c), 6(c), and 7, since it falls outside the range of electric fields and
gas densities of interest). The lower branch, corresponding to higher gas densities and
lower electron temperatures, is below and to the right of the break-even line for zero
ion slip. Instead of crossing the zero ion slip line, as in figures 4 and 9, this lower
branch becomes tangent to it. The different character of the break-even curves of fig-
ures 5 to 8 from those of figures 4 and 9 is due to the variation i n the mobilities of
c a r r i e r and seed ions among the various combinations of c a r r i e r and seed.
        Seeding increases the power density in two regions of figures 5 to 8, above the
upper branch, and to the right of the lower branch. In the first region, the effective
electric field uB(l - K) is generally too high to be attained in practice. The range of gas
densities and field strengths in the second region are of more practical interest.
        A typical generator operating curve is indicated by the short dashed curve in fig-
ures 4(b) and 5(b) for argon. The generator operating conditions a r e taken from one of
the cases that was extensively investigated in reference 5. In that reference the one-
dimensional MHD equations were solved for a constant-area channel, where the nonequi-
librium conductivities of seeded r a r e gases were calculated on the same basis as they
are herein. The electric field E was taken to be constant in reference 5, as required
by Maxwell's equation for the assumed one-dimensional situation. Since the gas velocity
varies along the generator duct, f o r this case it is convenient to define a new constant
load parameter K1 as

                                                  E
                                          K1 =-                                           (34)
                                               ulB


                                                                                            19
where u1 is the gas velocity at the entrance section. When this definition is combined
with conservation of mass, pu = p u the following equation for the operating curve is
                                  1 1'
obtained:




The dashed curves shown in figures 4(b) and 5(b) are for an entrance Mach number of
3.0 and an entrance stagnation temperature of 4000' R (2222' K), for which the entrance
gas velocity u1 is 1316 meters per second. For a magnetic field strength of 2 webers
                                                          5
per square meter, a stagnation pressure of 1 . 6 4 ~ 1 0 newtons per square meter
(1.62 atm) yields the optimum power density (ref. 5). The same conditions are assumed
herein. In this case it can be seen that the addition of cesium will increase the power
density except at the very end of the operating line. This conclusion is in agreement
with reference 5, in which the addition of a very small amount of cesium seed
(s = 0.000366) to argon c a r r i e r gas was found to yield the optimum total power output.
Figure 5(b) shows that seeding with potassium is detrimental to the power density
throughout the generator. Potassium seed was found to be inferior to cesium in refer-
ence 5, but potassium-seeded argon still produced a higher total power than unseeded
argon. The mobility of ions, however, was calculated on the basis of the polarizability
of the carrier gas atoms in reference 5. Such a calculation gives equal mobilities of
argon and potassium ions in argon, whereas the mobility of argon ions in argon is less
than that of potassium ions in argon because of charge exchange. Inclusion of charge ex-
                                                                                             .
change in this report accounts for the difference in conclusions regarding seeding of
argon with potassium.
     The upper limit on the gas velocity is

                                                                       U max =   )/2cpT0
             TABLE I. - MAXIMUM GAS

                    VELOCITIES                      where cp = 2   k is the constant pressure speci-
     a s     1 Stagnation temperature, T ~ O, K ~                  mc
         -    t                                     fic heat and T, is the stagnation temperature.
I
                                                                   U
                  1500   2000   2500   3000         The values of umax a r e useful in interpreting
I             I Maximum gas velocity, m/sec   ~     the results and a r e given in table I. The maxi-
                                                    mum attainable electric field and voltage may be
                         2030   2270   2486         estimated from these values of umax and the
    Argon                                           magnitude of the available magnetic field. At the
    Xenon
                                                    present time, a magnetic field of 2 webers per


    20
                                         *----
                                            550




                    lo
                     1 9                          1
                                                  P                             Id4                      ld5
                                                   cas density,N,:   a t ~ s l c um
                         Figure 10. -Effect of gas temperature on break-even curves for cesium-seeded argon.
                           Magnetic field strength, 2 webers per square meter.


square meter (20 000 G) is typical of MHD generators. For this magnetic fie-1 and
K = 0.5, the maximum attainable field uB(l - K) is equal to umax in magnitude and is
of the order of 103 volts per meter. With a very high magnetic field, s a y B = 10
webers per square meter (100 000 G), the magnitude of uB(l - I() may reach lo4.



                                       Effect of Static Temperature

    III figures 1 to 9 the gas temperature was taken to be 500'                            K, a typical value for
supersonic generator. The effect of changing the gas temperature from 500' to 1500° K
is shown in figure 10. The break-even curves for zero ion slip are very slightly af-
fected by the gas temperature. However, the character of the curves for Bi # 0 varies
significantly with gas temperature in the range from 500' to 600' K; and in fact, for gas
temperatures of 600' K and higher, the break-even curves for cesium-seeded argon have
the same character as the curves for the other combinations of gas and seed at 500' K
shown in figures 5 to 8. Since there is insignificant variation of the alkali ion mobilities
in the noble gases with temperature, the change in the character of the break-even
curves that accompanies a change in gas temperature is due to the variation of the

                                                                                                                    21
                         t                                          ./
                    Id
                         1 /
                           '.-/'
                                                                                  Magnetic field
                                                                                   strength,
                                                                                       B, m
                                                                                   Wblsq

                                                                                        1
                                                                        --              2




                    loll         I     I   I   I   Illll        I   1   I I I Ill1          I   I   I I I Ill]
                      1on                             1023                      1024                        1025
                                                             Ng/B, Wb-km-')
                             Figure 11. - Correlation of break-even curves when plotted as function of N",B
                               for cesium-seeded argon. Static gas temperature, 500' K.


mobility of the c a r r i e r ions with temperature, caused by charge exchange (see the dis-
cussion in appendix E).



                                               Effect of Magnetic Field

     Finally, it is interesting to note that the break-even curves for various magnetic
fields fall rather close together when u ( l - K) is plotted against Nz/B, as shown in
figure 11 for a constant gas temperature of 500' K. This fact may be used to estimate
roughly the location of the break-even curves for various magnetic fields when the shape
of the curve for one magnetic field is known.


                   GENERATOR PERFORMANCE WITH UNSEEDED GASES

     The purpose of the preceding analysis was to establish the regions of operation of a
generator where the addition of alkali seed to a given noble carrier gas would increase
the power density. A comparison of various combinations of seed and c a r r i e r gases re-
22
                                                                                      l4
                                                                                       O oOr                                                / /
Y
0   12 ooo
        4 T
                                                   Gas density,
                                                       N,:              /                    t

                                                                                 r
                                                                                 e
                                                                                 -v
                                                                                 W


                                                                                             t
                                                                                      6
                                                                                             (a) Electron temperature against effective electric field,
              (a) Electron temperature against effective electric field.                  16-




                                                                                 4
                                                                                 m




                      (b) Bgi against effective electric field.


                                                                                      'o

     :I
     1012 r-


     1010                                                                                              (b)      against effective electric field.
                                                      /      /

                                                                                 E
                                                                                      l0l2r

      104

      102


                                                                                 z
                                                                                 L

     100
                                                                                 n

     10-2
        101                    102                  IC?                    104
                       Effective electric field, uB(1 - K), Vlm                                         Effective electric field, uB(1 - K), Vlm

                  (c) Power density against effective electric field.                              (c) Power density against effective electric field.

            Figure 12. - Performance parameters as functions of electric                         Figure U. - Performance parameters as functions of
              field for unseeded argon. Magnetic field strength, 2 webers                          electric field for unseeded neon. Magnetic field
              per square meter; static gas temperature,      K.                                    strength, 2 webers per square meter; static gas
                                                                                                   temperature, !j@ K.




                                                                                                                                                          23
Y
0

+&        8000                                                                                                                                                                               Gas density,
a
L
3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,:N
m                                                                                                                                                                                            atomslcu m
'n
 G        6000
E,
c
c
e         4000
P
W



          20001          I         1       I       I l l 1 1 1   1       I       1 I 1 I111           I       I       I       I       I   ,I#l
                                 (a) Electron temperature against effective electric field.
           101 r-                                                                                                                                 4000
                                                                                                                                                        (a) Electron temperature against effective
                                                                                                                                                          electric field.
                                                                                                                                                   102 r


                                                                                                                                                   101




                                                                                                                                                  10-1

                  -
                                                                     I   I       I    1   I ,III




                -
           1010 -
                -
            108 -
                -
            106 -
                -
            104 -
                  -

            102 -
                -                                  I
                             I         ,                I IIII                            I b l t l                       I               IIIII
                                                                                                                                                         -
            100                                1    I                I       I    I   1                   I       I               I

                                                                                                                                                    100-     I   I   I   I   I 1 1 1 1   I    I    I    1   I ,Id




                      Figure 14. - Performance parameters as functions of electric field for
                        unseeded xenon. Magnetic field strength, 2 webers per square
                        meter; static gas temperature, SOOO K.




     24
                  E


                 J
                 =
                 Y




                  L


                 n
                  6”




                              1       I    I   I I I I Ill         1     I   I I I Ill1        I    I   I   I   I,l,j
                             101                         ld                             Id                         roa
                                                                       Xenon
                                                                 w
                                                                Id                           lo4
                                                                               Helium
                                                  Effective electric field, uB(1- K), Vlm
                        Figure 16. - Comparison of power densities of unseeded noble gases on basis of equal stag-
                          nation temperatures. Magnetic field strength, 2 webers per square meter; static gas
                          temperature, X@ K; gas density, 1024 atoms per cubic meter.


    quires the calculation of the power density for each combination at the operating condi-
    tions of interest and-for various seed fractions. Since these calculations have been car-
    ried out in reference 5, including the variation in properties along the generator channel,
    extensive calculations of this nature are unwarranted for the purposes of this report.
    However, the magnitude of the power density for zero seed does provide an idea of the
    best choice of c a r r i e r gas. For assigned values of B, NE, Te, and T, uB(l - K) is
    calculated from equation (24), and the result is substituted in equation (11) to yield the
    power density parameter P(l - K)/K. The electron temperature Te, pepi, and
    P(l - K)/K a r e plotted as a function of the effective electric field uB(l - K) in figures
    12 to 15 for unseeded argon, neon, xenon, and helium. Note that the scale of uB(l - K)
    i n the helium curves (fig. 15) extends one decade higher than the scales for the other
    gases. At any specified value of uB(l - K), the power densities for argon equal or ex-
    ceed those of the other gases. The single exception is xenon, which produces higher

I                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                  power at a gas density of        atoms
                                                                                  per cubic meter because the mobility
                                                                                  of xenon ions in xenon is smaller
                                                                                  than that of argon ions in argon.
                                                                                       A comparison of power densities
                                                                                  on the basis of equal stagnation tem-
                                                                                  peratures, rather than equal values
                                                                                  of uB(l - K), is shown in figure 16.
                                                                                  The curves shown a r e simply the
                                                                                  curves of figures 12(c), 13(c), 14(c),
                                                                                  and 15(c) for a gas density of 1024
                                                                                  atoms per cubic meter, a magnetic
                                                                                  field of 2 webers per square meter,
                                                                                  and a static gas temperature of
                                                                                  500' K. The scales of uB(l - K)
                                                                                  are shifted s o that a single vertical
                                                                                  line corresponds to the same stagna-


           F
     10- l7 1
            i                       L temperature,
                                Electron  10       T,      0
                                                          OK
                                                                                  tion temperature for all four of the
                                                                                  carrier gases. The dashed lines in-
                                                                                  dicate a few stagnation temperatures.
                                                                                3 Any two of the abscissa scales a r e
                                                                                  shifted with respect to each other by
                Figure 17. - Momentum transfer cross sections of noble gases.
                                                                                  an amount equal to the square root
of the ratio of their atomic weights, since u = )/2c (T - T) and c       l/mc.
                                                     P O             P
     Figure 16 discloses that argon produces the highest power at low values of uB(1- K),
but as uB(l - K) increases, the power production in neon and helium exceeds that of
argon. Although helium yields the highest power densities when uB(l - K) is greater
than about 4x10 3 volts per meter, argon and neon appear to be the best for operation
over a wide range of uB(1 - K). The latter a r e in fact the carrier gases with the lowest
electron elastic scattering cross sections at temperatures of the order of 1 electron
volt. The complete channel calculations of Heighway and Nichols (ref. 5) showed that
with regard to neon and argon carriers, the optimum overall power output for cesium-
 seeded argon was 15 percent larger than that for cesium-seeded neon. At the entrance
section of their generator, however, neon-cesium yielded a power density about twice
that for argon-cesium. The overall power output of cesium-seeded helium was found to
be considerably less than that of argon and neon. These results can be understood on
the basis of figure 16, since the power density in neon and helium, although larger at
high values of uB(l - K), fall off with decreasing uB(l - K) faster than it does in argon.

26
In a supersonic, constant-area generator, uB(1 - K) drops off rapidly, as shown by the
operating curve of figure 4(b), because u decreases and K increases, and therefore
argon, which produces the highest power density at low values of uB(l - I(), also pro-
duces the highest overall power output. Although the gas density does not remain strictly
constant through the generator, its variation is not significant, as can be seen from fig-
u r e 4(b), and the interpretation of the results of reference 5 by means of the constant
gas density curves of figure 16 should be qualitatively correct. The behavior of the
curves of figure 16 is not surprising in view of the variation of the elastic-scattering
c r o s s sections of the noble gases (fig. 17, p. 26) with decreasing electron temperature.
       The vertical lines in figure 16 corresponding to various stagnation temperatures
were drawn under the assumption that B(l - K) = 1 or K = 0.5 for the particular case
shown of B = 2 webers per square meter.



                                  CONCLUM NG REMARKS

       The consequences of the addition of alkali seed t o a noble carrier gas in an MHD
generator have been examined from the point of view of realizing magnetically induced
nonequilibrium ionization. An examination of the physical bases of the results tends to
identify the desirable properties of c a r r i e r and seed materials for this optimization of
power density.
       The important properties of c a r r i e r gases are that (1) they be of low molecular
weight so as to yield large induced electric fields for a given stagnation temperature and
(2) they have low cross sections to elastic scattering of electrons s o that the electrons
will tend to higher temperatures, resulting in high electric conductivity. The seed on
the other hand should have (1) low ionization potential so that in low concentrations i t is
fully ionized, (2) high molecular weight to minimize electron energy loss, and (3) low
c r o s s sections t o elastic scattering of electrons for the reason mentioned previously with
regard to the c a r r i e r gas.
       For the gas combinations considered herein, neon and argon appear to be the most
suitable c a r r i e r gases while cesium is the most suitable seed. For reasonable generator
operating conditions using these carriers, higher power densities will likely be obtained
with seed rather than in the absence of seed and with cesium seed rather than with any
lighter alkali gas.
       It should be pointed out that the present analysis directly answers the question of
whether the power densityincreases o r decreases with the addition of seed only in the
limiting case where the seed fraction approaches zero. The conclusions cannot be ex-
tended to arbitrary seed fractions since the power density does not necessarily vary
monotonically with seed fraction. In fact, the results of reference 5 indicate that for a

                                                                                            27
                                                                                   ,



case where the present analysis indicates the desirability of seeding there is an optimum
seed fraction beyond which power density decreases with increase in seed fraction.
    Another important restriction of the present analysis is due to the omission of in-
elastic collisions and radiation losses. The analysis of the combined effect of these
processes on nonequilibrium ionization in a seeded plasma is a formidable problem, but
one which is important enough to warrant further study.

Lewis Research Center,
   National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
        Cleveland, Ohio, January 12, 1965.




28
                                  APPENDIX A


                                   SYMBOLS

      Mks units a r e used except where explicitly noted otherwise.
A     atomic weight                                    number of particles or
                                         Nr
a     defined by eq. (29a)                               rth species per unit
                                                         volume
B     magnetic field strength
                                         NOr           sum of number densities
b     defined by eq. (29b)
                                                         of ions and atoms of
      impact parameter for 90'                           species r
        coulomb scattering
                                                      defined by eq. (31)
      defined by eqs. (B15)
                                         NO            standard gas density,
      defined by eq. (29c)
                                                          2.69X10 19 atoms/cu c m
      defined by eq. (D22)
                                         n            exponent in eq. (Dll)
      Debye length, eq. (C14)
                                         P            power density
      electric field
                                         Qc           total cross section for
      electron charge, '                                scattering of mono-
         1. 602x10-19 C                                 energetic beam,
      ground state degeneracy                            eq. (C25)
      defined by eq. (26)                Qm           momentum transfer cross
                                                       section for scattering
      Planck constant,
                                                       of monoenergetic beam
         6 . 6 2 5 ~ 1 0 -J-sec
                           ~~
                                                       definedbyeq. (C6)
J     current density
                                         Qrt          collision cross section
K     load parameter defined                            for momentum transfer
         by eq. (6)                                     fromspecies r to
      defined by eq. (C3)                               species t averaged
Krt
                                                        over Maxwell distribu-
k     Boltzmann constant,
                                                        tion, eq. (C10)
        1.380xio-~~     JPK
                                                      defined by eq. (D13)
mr    mass of particle of rth            Rrt
         species                         S            seed fraction defined by
      reduced mass of particles                         eq. (12)
mrt
         r and t                         T            static gas temperature

                                                                                 29
           temperature of rth species           A      ratio of Debye radius to impact
Tr
                                                         parameter for 90' scattering
U          gas velocity                                  defined by eq. (C16), eq. (C19)
Vr         ionization potential of r th         h      defined by eq. (B20)
             species
                                                P      ion mobility
V          relative speed of particles
                                                       ion mobility at 300' K and gas
           velocity of particle of r th         10
                                                         density of 2. 69x10 19
vr
             species                                     atoms/cu cm
Wd
           difference in ion drift velocities          total electron collision frequency,
             defined by eq. (19)                'e
                                                         eq. (8)
wi
           mean ion drift velocity defined             effective ion-atom collision fre-
                                                'ia
             by eq. (B8)                                 quency defined by eq. (B19)
wr         drift velocity of rth species               mean collision frequency for
                                                'r t
           degree of ionization of carrier              momentum transfer from
xC
             gas defined by eq. (15)                    species r to species t
                                                P      gas density
X          degree of ionization of seed de-
    S
             fined by eq. (16)                         electrical conductivity
                                                OO
    (11)   cross section for momentum           X      scattering angle in center of
'rt
             transfer from species r to                  mass coordinates
             species t averaged over            P!     defined by eq. (D18)
             Maxwell distribution defined
                                                52     scattering solid angle
             by eq. (C5)
a!         mean thermal speed, eq. (C4)         we     electron cyclotron frequency

           electron Hall parameter defined      Subscripts:
Pe
             by eq. (9)
                                                a      atom
Pi         ion slip parameter defined by
                                                C      c a r r i e r gas atom
             eq. (10)
6          mean elastic energy loss factor      C+     carrier gas ion
            defined by eq. (2)                  e      electron
€          defined by eq. (B31)                 i      ion

€0
           permittivity of free space,           max   maximum
             8. 854X1O-l2 F/m                    min    minimum



 30
     ,



r        rth species                        t   tth species
           ( r = e, i, a, c , c+, s , s+)           (t = e, i, a, c, c +, s, s+)

s        seedatom                           0   stagnation conditions
s+       seedion                            1   conditions at generator entrance




                                                                                   31
                                                   APPENDIX B


                            CALCULATION OF ION SLIP FOR TWO ION SPECIES

          The d r i f t motion of a species r of charged particles in crossed electric and magne-
     tic fields is described by the momentum equation (ref. 4)

                                                               (r = e, s+, c+; t = e, s+, c +, s, C)
           e,(:*   + G~ x 5) =       mrtvrt(Gr   - Gt)                                                                (B1)
                                 t

     where
                                                   -
                                                   E*-E+UXB
                                                           4     4     -




._
     is the effective electric field measured in a coordinate system moving with the mean gas
     velocity      c,
                  and mrt is the reduced mass of particles r and t, defined as

                                                               m m
                                                                 r t
                                                   mrt-          +mt
                                                               r

         When written out in full for the electrons e, c a r r i e r gas ions c+, and seed ions s+,
     equation (Bl) becomes


     e:



     C+:


                                                                                             -
                                                                                          = e(E* +           x   5)
                                                         ~ c + s + v c + s + ~ c +- GsJ
                                                                                                         +




                                                    +                                                C


     S+:



                                                    + m + +v
                                                           s c
                                                                     +




                                                                     s c
                                                                           +ts+
                                                                             -
                                                                                             4


                                                                                  Gc+) = e(E* + %
                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                         +   X   g)


     32
    .

As in reference 4, the atom drift velocities a r e neglected, an assumption that is valid
for small degrees of ionization.
     In reference 4, the drift motion of a single ion species for an unseeded plasma in
crossed electric and magnetic fields was described by the momentum equation




The aim here is to derive a similar equation for the combined drift motion of the two ion
species in the seeded plasma. To accomplish this, it is convenient to define a m e G ion
drift velocity as

                                   4      Nc+Gc++ Ns+Ss+
                                  w.
                                    1
                                               Nc+ + Ns+

The difference in ion drift velocities

                                         Wd   = wc+ - wS+

is also a convenient quantity.
     The following equation is obtained by multiplying equation (B5)by Nc+, equa-
tion (B6) by Ns+, adding and making use of the definitions of Gi and Gd (eqs. (B8)
and (B9),respectively):




                                    +ms+s”s+s)     1.   1
                                                                  N#S+
                                                            + Nc+ + N,+ )2 p C + C Y C + C
                                                              ~                              +   mc+s’c+s~


                                    - (ms+cvs+c + ms+svs+sj G~ = e(E* + S~x E)                       (BIOI


In reducing the first term of equation (B10) to this form, use was made of the fact that




                                                                                                        33
since the ion-electron collision frequency involves only the electron number density and
electron temperature and not the properties of the individual ions (provided all the ions
are singly charged), Also, ion-ion collisions cancel out because of conservation of
momentum in collisions.
    An equation for the difference velocity Gd is formed by subtracting equation (B6)
from equation (B5). The resulting equation becomes




If




then the ions drift with the same velocity. Since urt is proportional to Nt, equa-
tion (B13) can be satisfied for arbitrary seed and c a r r i e r gas densities only i f the col-
lision coefficients for each ion species with the seed and c a r r i e r gas atoms a r e the same,
that is, only if

                                    mc+cvc+c = ms+cvs+c                                    (B14a)


                                             - ms+svs+s
                                    mc+svc+s -                                             (B14b)


     Unfortunately, conditions (B14) a r e generally not satisfied. Therefore, it is neces-
sary to solve equation (B12) for Gd in terms of       ciand substitute the result in equa-
tion (B10). The following abbreviations a r e introduced:

                                                                                           (B15a)


                                                                                           (B15b)



34
                           c3 E mc+s+v,+s+        + ms+c+vs+c+ + mevie




When compared to the other terms in equation (B15c), mevie is of the order (me/mi)
and therefore may be neglected. Then equation (B12)may be rewritten as




which may be easily solved by premultiplying both sides by the operator

                                                ei5
                                             1--
                                                c4

and using the fact that   zd is perpendicular to ii. Then
                                c1 - c2            1
                                     c4
                                             1+   ($
If equation (B17) is substituted into equation (BlO), the resulting equation can be
written in a form quite similar to that of equation (B7),namely,


                                     - T,) + 2 v i a ~ i = e [E* + (1 + A ) G ~x G]
                                              mC
                          mevie(Gi


where now the effective ion-neutral collision frequency is defined as
                  r


                                       sxS
         v.ia =                                                                       I

                                 + xc   + sxS c2 -
                                                       (xc + sxs)    c4       l+($J



and

                                                                                          35
The collision frequency for electrons with any single ion species A+ in a mixture of
singly charged ions is




where the electron-ion collision cross section Qei is determined by the coulomb inter-
action between electron and ion and is therefore the same for all singly charged ions
(see appendix C for the exact expression). In the present case, the total electron-ion
collision frequency is




where




If the total electron-atom collision frequency is written




and use is made of the definition of Gi (eq. (B8))and equations (B22)and (B23),equa-
tion (B4)may be written in the form
                                                         -c

                       me v ei.(we - wi) + me v eaWe = -e(E*- + 5, X
                              -    4            4

                                                                       G>
which is identical to equation (36)of reference 4.
     Ohm's law and the expression for the electron heating rate a r e obtained from equa-
tions (B18)and (B25). The total current




and the electron current

36
                                               0

                                               Je = - N eew',


are introduced into equations (B25) and (B18), which become
                                           -                          - -
                                -m e uei. J - m e ueaJe =-Nee 2-*E + e J e x B           (B28)


                            -
                     me uei.J +-mc uia(J - Je) =Nee 2-E* + e ( l + A)(J - Je) X B
                                                                         -   0   -   .   (B29)


Addition of equations (B28) and (B29) and solution of the resulting equation for     ze by
the same device as employed in the solution of equation (B16) yield

           -
           J =
             e
                     ( 1 + € )2 + A 2Pi2

where


                                               E G 2 - - me "ea
                                                      mc u.ia


and

                                                     2eB
                                                8. = -
                                                      mc u.ia


muation (B30) is substituted into equation (B28), which may then be put in the following
form:


  -*
(JOE =
                 1




                                                    +A(l+X)pf-~


where (Jo is the conductivity


                                                                                             37
                                                                  2
                                                              Nee
                                                         00 = -
                                                              meu e


and the electron Hall parameter                Pe is defined as
                                                           w
                                                     p
                                                         e
                                                           =e3--
                                                             eB
                                                           'e   meVe

The electron heating rate Je
                                  - E*              is, from equations (B30) and (B32)

          J2                 1
Je . E* = -
4    -



               [(l + E ) 2   + X 2Pi]2 2


                                           +   3 [1+ + x ( l + X ) P Y } + pepiE [1+ (1 +
                                                           E                             E
                                               'e

     Since E and Pi2 a r e both much smaller than 1, and h for small seed fractions
( s < 0. 1)is of order 1 or less, terms of order E , E X , and X 2Pi2 can be neglected in
equations (B32) and (B33). Thus, the simplified equations a r e

                                               "* = ( I+Pet)?- P e -5X J -                   (3334)
                                       OOE                             B




which are formally identical to equations (49) and (51) of reference 4. The only modifi-
cation is that via is defined differently now (eq. (B19)). In the limit of zero seed, via
reduces to v ~ + as~ , it should.




38
                                        APPENDIX C


        MOMENTUM TRANSFER CROSS SECTIONS AND COLLISION FREQUENCIES

    The collision frequencies vrt used in this report refer to the average rate of
momentum transfer from species r to species t per particle of species r. The
average rate of momentum transfer from species r is


                                 Jm3.      (2)    coll d3vr


where (6fr/6t)coll denotes the rate of change of the distribution function f r due to col-
lisions. Burgers (refs. 6 and 7) has obtained an explicit expression for (Cl)by assum-
ing that the distribution function is close to Maxwellian. In the first approximation, he
obtains




where   Tr and Tt a r e the drift velocities. The friction coefficient Krt is defined as




where mrt is the reduced mass


                                                 mrmt
                                        mrt =
                                                mr + mt


a is a mean thermal speed2




    2As noted in reference 4, Burgers? results apply to only the case Tr = Tt = T, but
equation (C4)represents the proper generalization of Burgers? work to the case of d i f -
ferent temperatures.
                                                                                           39
and Z
    )':    is an averaged cross section for momentum transfer, defined as




where v = Ivr - vtl is the relative speed.
            -   4




                                             ( 1)) appearing in the integrand is the
     The quantity Qm (which Burgers denotes Srt
momentum transfer collision cross section for a beam of particles of velocity v and is
defined as




where ~ ( vx), is the differential cross section for scattering through the angle x and
dS1 the element of solid angle.
     The relation between vrt and Krt is (refs. 4 and 8)


                                        Krt  - -2 aNtZrt
                                             -        (11)
                                "rt =
                                        mrtNr 3

More often, the 2/3 factor is absorbed into the c r o s s section, and the average value of
the relative speed, which is




is used in place of     Then
                      CY.      vrt is written in the conventional definition as

                                        v r t = Nt( V) Q r t

Clearly,

40
        For collisions between electrons and atoms or ions, the relative speed v is very
    nearly equal to ve, and a ( Z k T , / ~ n ~ ) l / ~hence
                                                        ;    equations (C10) and (C5)may be re-
    duced to     ‘




        The well-known Rutherford cross section




    is used to calculate Qm for collisions of electrons with singly charged ions. When
    equation (C12) and the formula dS2 = 27r sin x dx are substituted into equation (C6)and
    the integration is performed over all scattering angles from 0 to n, the result is




    Due to the long range nature of the coulomb potential, this integral diverges at the lower
    limit. Actually, the maximum range of the electrostatic field of an ion is of the order of
    the Debye length, which is (ref. 9)

                                      ,   d=($)        1/2




    At distances larger than d, electrons almost completely screen the field of the ion.
    Hence it is customary to replace the lower limit in equation (C13)by the minimum scat-
1   tering angle Xmin, which is determined from the relation


                                                                                              41
where A is the ratio of the Debye length to the impact parameter bo for 90' scattering
(ref. 9)




                                               e2    1
                                             4ne0 m v
                                                       2
                                                     e e

Ions also contribute to the screening effect, but as pointed out in reference 10, the time
involved in an encounter between an electron and an ion is much smaller than the period
of oscillation of the ions; hence, there is not enough time for the ions to respond to the
fluctuation in charge caused by the passing electron, and the ions therefore cannot pro-
vide effective screening for electron-ion collisions.
     The result of cutting off the integral in Qm at xmin is therefore




o r since A 2 >> 1



                                                         1nA


                                                                                      2
On account of the slow variation of In A with ve, i t is also customary to replace meve
in equation (C16) by its average value, 3kTe, so that A becomes

                                         12n(e0kTe)3/2
                                    A=
                                             3 1/2
                                            e Ne



42
Int gration of th- expression (C18) according to equation (C11) yields finally the average
momentum transfer cross section for electron-ion collisions




     The ion-ion cross section for singly charged ions is derived from equations (C5)
and (C10) by using a Rutherford cross section similar to equation (C12), but with me
replaced by the reduced mass of the ions and ve by the relative speed v of the ions.
The screening due to ions must also be included, since the ion-ion collision time is of
the same order as the ion oscillation period. The correct Debye length d‘, including the
effect of ion screening, is (ref. 10)

                                        -1
                                         - - -1
                                              +-        1
                                        dt2 d2        di2


where




The result for the ion-ion cross section is

                                                 2
                                                     l n ( h f 2 + 1)
                                Qii= E(&)4“0            (kTi) 2


where A’ is the ratio of the Debye length d y to the average impact parameter for 90’
scattering of ions (e2/4mO)/3kTi


                                    12a(~,kT~)
                                            3/2
                             At =
                                      e3N.il/’


    The ion temperature is assumed to be equal to the gas temperature T. Since

                                                                                         43
Te >> T, the last factor in equation (C24) may be set equal to one. However, A' << A,
and it is generally incorrect to make the approximation A' >> 1 in equation (C23).
     For electron-atom collisions, experimental values of the momentum transfer cross
section Qm were used. The authors of reference 5 have evaluated Qet(Te) numerically
for a number of gases in the range of Te from 100' to 15 000' K. Where experimental
values of Qm were not available, they used the total cross section




instead. The difference between Qm and Qc for most gases is l e s s than 10 percent
(ref. 11, p. 31). The results for Qec(Te) for the noble gases a r e summarized in fig-
ure 17 onpage 26.
     In reference 4, it was assumed that electron-atom collisions could be treated by the
hard-sphere model, in which Qm is independent of ve. In that case, equation (C11)
yields

                                            4
                                      Qec = 3 Qm


A constant value of Qm = 2. 0X1O-l7 square centimeter was used for argon in refer-
ences 1, 3, and 4. This value w a s inferred from monoenergetic cross section data
(ref. 11, p. 19), which showed little variation over a range of electron energies below
1 electron volt. From figure 17 it can be seen that this value w a s far too low. The
average momentum transfer cross section also r i s e s rather rapidly with electron tem-
perature. The necessity of using the properly averaged cross section is apparent.
     The momentum transfer frequencies for ion-atom collisions a r e calculated from
ionic mobility data. The mobility prt of an ion of species r in a gas of species t is
defined as




where Tr is the drift velocity and E is the electric field. Comparison of equations
(Bl) and (C27) shows that the mobility for singly charged ions is related to the average
momentum transfer urt by the formula

                                                 e
                                      prt =
                                              "rt'rt



44
Note that vrt is proportional and prt is inversely proportional to the density Nt. Ex-
perimental mobilities are often referred to the standard gas density No = 2.69~1019
atoms per cubic centimeter and the corresponding mobility denoted by p0, as in refer-
ence 11, so that the mobility p at any other gas density N is




                                                                                    45
                                            APPENDIX D


                          DERIVATION OF BREAK-EVEN CONDITION

       The derivatives dNe/ds, dve/ds, dvia/ds, and dd/ds are required for the evalua-
tion of dTe/ds and dP/ds f r o m equations (20) and (22). Since the former quantities
a r e functions of the degrees of ionization xc and xs of the c a r r i e r and seed gases, it is
convenient to first calculate dxc/ds and dxs/ds.
       Differentiation of equations (18) and (19) with respect to s and solution of the r e -
sulting equations for dxc/ds and dx,/ds yield


&C                   xc(l - xc)
--   -
ds       xC(l - xC) + sxs(l - xS) + xC + sxS


                                                  + sxs(l - xs)           ---
                                                                          Te d s


                   xs(l - xs)
-&S- -
 ds    xC(l - xC) + S X s ( l - xS ) + xC + sxS




Only the limiting forms of these expressions for s = 0 will be used here. It will be as-
sumed that, in the limit of zero seed, the degree of ionization xs of the seed approaches
unity. Numerical calculations carried out in the course of the work reported in refer-
ence 4 for s -< 0.01 support this assumption over the range of electron temperatures of
interest. In fact, if s is set equal to zero in equations (18) and (19) for xc << 1, the
following expressions a r e obtained for x and xs:
                                          C




                                                             1
                                            xs    -
                                                  N




                                                             JT
                                                      1 +-
                                                             FS

46
where Fs amd F, are the right sides of equations (18) and (19), respectively. The
ionization potential of the c a r r i e r gas is several times larger than that of the seed, so
that Fc << Fs; and since Fs > 1 for the range of electron temperatures of interest
here, xs = 1 to a high degree of approximation.
     With the aforementioned assumptions, in the limit of zero seed, equation (Dl)r e -
duces to




Since dxs/ds appears everywhere multiplied by s, its limiting expression for s = 0 is
not required.
     From equation (17), for xs = 1,




Substitution of equation (D5)into equation (20)yields the expression




     The various derivatives in equation (22) will now be calculated.       The total electron
collision frequency is written

                                      v e = v ec   +   'es +"ei

where
The electron-ion cross section Qei is proportional to TL2, as can be seen from equa-
tion (C20). For the electron-atom cross sections the variation with electron temperature
is expressed by relations of the form

                                            Qec = (const)Te
                                                          n
                                                                                        (D11)


in the immediate vicinity of the electron temperature corresponding to zero seed. The
exponent n is taken from the slope of a log-log plot of Qec as a function of Te. The
method of deducing the average momentum transfer cross section Qec(Te) from experi-
mental data on the momentum transfer cross section Qm(v,) for a monoenergetic beam
of electrons is described in appendix C.
     The derivative of ve with respect to s can be calculated in a straightforward man-
ner using equations (D7) to (D11) and (D4). The slight variation of In A with s can be
neglected. In the limit of zero seed the result becomes




                    f 2(1 - xc)   ("- + -   evc]}kr%)            +-   1   :( +-- y )
                                                                           -   1        (D12)
                        2 - xC     2        kTe               s=o 2 - xc       xc   e

    The calculation of dvia/ds      is also straightforward. It is convenient to use the ab-
breviation


                                        R = _ - - mrtvrt
                                         rt


where ion-ion and ion-atom collisions a r e involved, since this quantity is independent of
s. Then the quantities C1, C2, and C3, which enter into the expression (B19)for via
become




48
Substitution of equations (D14) to (D16) into equation (B19) and differentiation of the re-
sult with respect to s yields in the limit of zero seed



V.                                                                                2 - xc
                                                                                           +-
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                     *
 ia        s=o                                                              s=o             xC




where the e q r e s s i o n (D4) has been used for (dxc/ds)      and the following notation has
                                                            s=o'
been introduced for brevity:




In obtaining equations (D17) and @18), use was made of the approximation
(eB/C4)2 << 1. This approximation is consistent with the assumptions of appendix B
since the quantity (eB/C4)2 is of the same order as Pi.
                                                     2
      Finally, the derivative db/ds is calculated from the expression




and the result in the limit s = 0 is




     Substitution of equations (D12), (D17), and (D20) into equation (22) yields the follow-
ing equation for (dTe/ds)s=O:




                                                                                                    49
where


                                                              Te
                                                            Te - T




Substituting equation (D21) into equation (D6) and rearranging yields the result




where the numerator N is defined as


Nc&[
  'e
         2 n + 1 + - - x ,Te
                     Te - T     (3 - - 2eV,
                                       kTe    +&)I    - 3$+pepi{T::T


           +\k   [ (             2eVc
                 (1 - x c ) 3 + -kTe +T
                                      ):T
                                        :       I&+

50
     For the cases of interest in this report, the denominator D always turns out to be
positive. Thus the sign of dP/ds is governed by the sign of N. For N S 0, seeding
does not improve the power density.




                                                                                          51
                                            APPENDIX E


                                 DETAILS OF THE CALCULATION

     The break-even condition (eq. (23)) is rewritten as
     #




           --3 - -"ei
                   -     "ec           Te
                  "e     'e           Te - T



              -   ( ~ ~( :) ) ~ {
                   1--         - 3 1--        -+-


where the magnetic field B enters only through          Pepi, which for s = 0 becomes




The expressions for vec/ve       and vei/ve    in the limit s = 0 a r e obtained from equa-
tions (D8) and (D10)




                                    -"ei
                                      - -           XcQei



where from equations (C19) and (C20)


52
                             Qei. = 4.34X10- l8   In A   (sq m)
                                                   -I”
                                                  (kT,



and the limit of zero seed

                                          Ni= xC$                                      037)


    The degree of ionization xc of the carrier gas is calculated from equation (19),



                                            c)i*.Tei(32)/2
which for s = 0 becomes


                      - -xC2 - 6.04X1027 - -             exp - -
                      1 - xc
                                    %
When xc << 1, a good approximation to xc is




    Finally, the ingredients will be assembled for the quantity 9,which was defined in
equation (D18). The quantities Rs+c and Rc+c for ion-atom collisions are calculated
from data on ion mobilities. From the definition (D13) of Rrt and equations (C28) and
(C29), it follows that




                         ~ ~ per cubic meter is the s t a n a r d gas density and (pc
where No = 2 . 6 9 ~ 1 0atoms
                                                                                      rt
the corresponding mobility. If p0 is given in square centimeters per volt per second,
as is usually the case,


                                                                                           53
     For collisions between ions of species A+ and B+, equations (C9) and (C10) give




if it is assumed that both ion species a r e at the temperature T of the gas. When equa-
tion (E12) and the expression for Qii (eq. (C23)) a r e substituted into the definition for
the ion-ion collision coefficient RA+B+ (eq. (D13)), the following expression is obtained:


                                         -27 1/2 ln(A’2 + 1)
                         RA+B+ = 1.38Xl.O   mA+B+
                                                  1-kT \“/2

where




Then 4? may be written


                                                     l+r




where




and A, and As a r e the atomic weights of c a r r i e r gas and seed, respectively. The
units of (IJ’o)c+c a r e square centimeters per volt per second in equation (E16). Note

54
                                 TABLE II. - PROPERTIES O F NOBLE GASES

             Gas               Atomic Ionization >round state [on mobility at 300' K anc
                                                                  gas density of 2.69X10 19
                               weight of potential, statistical
                                carrier     VC,
                                                     weight of     atoms per cubic centi-
                                  gas,      eV      :arrier gas - meter (refs. 12 and 14),
                                  AC                                                           PO'
                                                                                     sq cm/(v)(sec)

                          I


           Helium                4.003         24.580                                      10.8
                                20.183         21.559                                       4.2
           Argon                39.944         15.755                                       1.60
           Krypton              83.80          13.996                                        .go
           Xenon               131.30          12.127                                        .58



                              TABLE m. - ATOMIC WEIGHTS A N D MOBILITIES

                                 O F ALKALI SEED IONS IN NOBLE GASES

                              [Mobility data taken from table 9-2-2 of ref. 12.)

                          Seed          Atomic                   Background gas

                                    I
                                        weight
                                          nF     I
                                                            I      I
                                                     Helium Neon Argon
                                                            I      I
                                                                             I
                                                                             f
                                                                                 Krypton   I Xenon
                                                                                           I          I


                                         seed,
                    I
                                                     2 . 6 9 ~ 1 0 ~atoms
                                                                    '     per cubic centimeter,
                                          AS
                                                                       PO'


                        Lithium
                        Sodium
                                    1
                                    I


                                    6.94
                                   22.991
                                                 1
                                                 I


                                                      24.4 111.11 4.7
                                                      22.8   8.2  3.0              Xi      1 t:; 1
                                                                                                      I



                        Potassium 39. 100             21.6   7.6  2.6              1.9         1.4
                        Rubidium   85.48              20.2   6.8  2.2              1.5         1.0
                        Cesium    132.91              18.5   6.1  2.1              1.3          .91


that @ vanishes when the mobilities of the seed and carrier gas ions a r e equal.
     With the previous expressions it is a simple matter to calculate BeBi from equa-
tion (El)for prescribed values of Te, T, and .$I    Then the corresponding value of B
is calculated from equation (E2),which upon insertion of the expression for vc+c in
terms of pc+c (eq. (C28))and the relation between pc+c and the standard mobility
@O)C+C
         (eq. (C29))becomes



                                                                                                          (E171

                                                                                                            55
                                        112
                                       (T
                       v = 6.69X10 5 e''  - 1 1,
                                               - xc)Qec + xcQei]N:
                        e


The gas velocity required to attain the prescribed electron temperature is calculated
from equation (24), which may be written




     The pertinent properties of the r a r e gases a r e summarized in table II. Table III
gives the atomic weights and mobilities of the alkali seed ions in the noble gases. The
mobilities of the alkali ions in the noble gases a r e well predicted by classical collision
theory in which the interaction of the ion and atom is assumed to be a polarization attrac-
tion (ref. 12). In this case the theoretical mobility is independent of gas temperature, as
will be assumed here, The available experimental data (ref. 13) indicate that this is a
reasonably good assumption. The mobility of the noble gas ions in their parent gases,
however, decreases slowly with increasing temperature because of the effect of charge
exchange (ref. 14). The following theoretical expressions for the temperature depen-
dence are given in reference 14 and a r e in good agreement with experiment:

       1 (He+ in He) = 2.96X10- 3 T 1/ 2 + 3. 11X10-2 + 2. 11X10-2 T'l
       -                                                                        + 6.66 T-2 (E20a)
        PO


          1 (Ne+ in Ne) = 8. 69x10- 3 T 1/ 2 + 9. 16X10-2 + 0. 20 T - l + 59. 7 T-2
          -                                                                                (E20b)
             PO


             -1 (Ar+ in Ar) = 2 . 0 8 ~ 1 02- T 1/ 2 + 0.24 + 1.33 T - l + 1. 43X102 T-2   (E20c)
             IJ.0

These expressions, which a r e claimed to be valid for 50' to 1200' K, a r e used in the
calculations. Unfortunately, no expression for the temperature dependence of xenon was
given. For xenon the same temperature dependence as for argon is assumed (eq.
(E20c)), but with the constant 0. 24 replaced by 1.36 in order to give the correct value of
p o at 300° K.
    To illustrate the procedure, a sample calculation for argon seeded with cesium
(atomic weight = 132.91) is given. An electron temperature Te = 8000' K (0. 689 ev)

56
and a gas temperature of T = 500' K a r e chosen. First the break-even point for zero
ion slip is determined from equation (31). From equation (E9)


               g(T ) = 7 . 7 7 ~ 1 -0,/6 ~ (0.
                  e
                                           ~ 689)3/4exp   [- ;l:   = 1.57X109



Let In A = 7.0 as a first approximation.       Then from equation (E5)




The electron-atom cross section for argon at this temperature is Qec = 4 . 2 5 ~ 1 020    -
square meter, s o that Qec/Qei = 0 . 6 6 4 ~ 1 0 - ~ The
                                                     .   coefficients of equation (28)are
a = 4.33, b = 16.06, c = 0.935 (for n = 1-13), and from equation (30)
(vec/v .)       = 0.0582. The limiting gas density is from equation (31)
       el lim
(q)lim = 1 . 8 9 5 ~ 1 0 ~ ~ m - ~for
                             and   , this gas density equation (E6) gives In A = 6.40. The
calculation is repeated with this new value of In A. The ratio (vec/v .)            is essen-
                                                                           el lim
tially unchanged, while the new value of @ is 1 . 5 8 2 ~ 1 0 for ~ ~ ,which In A = 6.44.
Another iteration gives  (l$)lim   = 1. 60x1022 and In A = 6.45, and further iterations are
not required.
      The value of(qlim     determines the point where Pepi = 0. For other gas den-
sities, Pepi is calculated from equation (El). For I$ <                  both sides of equa-
tion (El) a r e positive. For l$ >              the right side of equation (El) is negative,
but as the gas density is increased, the coefficient of the left side changes from positive
                                                                        22
to negative. In the present example, this occurs at I$ = 4.69X10 per cubic meter.
Since pepi must be positive, for the range of densities 1. 6X1022 <      l$   < 4. 69X1022 the
break-even condition cannot be satisfied; hence seed increases the power. For
    > 4. 69X1022, the coefficient on the left side of equation (El) is negative, and a posi-
tive value of pepi may be found that satisfies the equality. Figure 18(a) shows the
variationof pepi with    q.
      The sign of dP/ds in regions off the break-even curve is determined from equa-
tion (23) as follows. If both the right and left sides of equation (23) are positive and if
Bepi is smaller than its break-even value (determined from eq. (El)), then inequality
(23) is satisfied and dP/ds < 0. If pepi is larger than its break-even value, the in-
equality cannot be satisfied and dP/ds > 0. Therefore, in figure 18(a) dP/ds is positive
above the left branch of the break-even curve and negative below the curve. When both
the left and right sides of equation (23) are negative, as in the present example for
I$ > 4. 69X1022, then for Bepi < ((3 e(3.)1 break-even the inequality is not satisfied and
                                                                                            57
                                                       Gas density, N:,   atornslcu m
          (a) Bpi against gas density.                (b) Magnetic field against gas density.       (c) Effective electric field against gas
                                                                                                      density.
        Figure 18. - Results of sample calculation for cesium-seeded argon. Electron temperature,         K; gas temperature, 5000 K.


dP/ds > 0. In the region 1. 6X1022 < NE < 4. 69X1022, dP/ds > 0, as mentioned pre-
viously.
      Once Pepi has been calculated for assigned values of NZ, Te, and T, the cor-
responding values of the magnetic field B and the effective electric field uB(l - K) a r e
obtained from equations (E17) and (E19), respectively. The results for the example a r e
shown i n figures 18(b) and (c). From figure 18(b) the values of NZ corresponding to a
particular magnetic field may be picked off; for example, for B = 2 webers p e r square
meter,       is 5. 8X1022 and 1. 15x1023 per cubic meter. The values of uB(1 - K) at
these densities are read from figure 18(c) and a r e 7.3X10 2 and 5.25X10 2 volts per meter,
respectively. These two points lie on the lower branch of the break-even curve of fig-
u r e 4(b). Curves similar to those of figures 18(b) and (c) a r e constructed for each as-
signed electron temperature, and the densities NZ and the electric field uB(l - K) a r e
read from the curves for a specified magnetic field. The results for cesium-seeded
argon are plotted in figure 4 for various magnetic fields. At high electron temperatures
(above 9000' K), points on the upper branches of the break-even curves of figure 4 a r e
obtained.




58
                                           REFERENCES

     1. Kerrebrock, Jack L. : Conduction in Gases with Elevated Electron Temperature.
          Engineering Aspects of Magnetohydrodynamics, C. Manna1 and N. W. Mather,
          eds., Columbia Univ. Press, 1962, pp. 327-346.
     2. Ben Daniel, D. J. ; and Tamor, S. : Nonequilibrium Ionization in Magnetohydro-
          dynamic Generators. Rep. 62-RL-(2922-E), General Electric Co. , Jan. 1962.
     3. Hurwitz, H., Jr. ; Sutton, G. W. ; and Tamor, S. : Electron Heating in Magneto-
          hydrodynamic Power Generators. A R S Jour., vol. 32, no. 8, Aug. 1962, pp.
          1237- 1243.
     4. Lyman, Frederic A. ; Goldstein, Arthur W. ; and Heighway, John E. : Effect of
          Seeding and Ion Slip on Electron Heating in a Magnetohydrodynamic Generator.
          NASA TN D-2118, 1964.
      5. Heighway, John E. ; Nichols, Lester D. : Brayton Cycle Magnetohydrodynamic
           Power Generation with Nonequilibrium Conductivity. KASA TN D-2651, 1965.
     6. Burgers, J. M. : Selected Topics from the Theory of Gas Flow at High Tempera-
             tures. Ch. V. The Application of Transfer Equations to the Calculation of Diffu-
             sion, Heat Conduction, Viscosity and Electric Conductivity. Tech. Notes BN- 124a,
             b, Inst. Fluid Dynamics and Appl. Math., Univ. of Maryland, May 1958.
     7. Burgers, J. M. : Statistical Plasma Mechanics. Ch. 5 of Symposium on Plasma
          Dynamics, F. H. Clauser, ed., Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., Inc., 1960.
     8. Burgers, J. M. : Some Problems of Magneto-Gasdynamics. Lectures on Fluid
          Mech., by Sydney Goldstein, Intersci. Pub., Inc., 1960, p. 293.
     9. Spitzer, Lyman, Jr. : Physics of Fully Ionized Gases. Second ed., Intersci. Pub.,
          Inc., 1962, p. 127.
    10. Delcroix, J. L. : Introduction to the Theory of Ionized Gases. Intersci. Pub., Inc.,
          1960, p. 125.
    11. Brown, Sanborn C. : Basic Data of Plasma Physics.      Tech. Press, M. I. T., 1959.
    12. McDaniel, E. W. : Collision Phenomena in Ionized Gases. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
          1964, ch. 9.
    13. Dalgarno, A. : Diffusion and Mobilities. Atomic and Molecular Processes, ch. 16,
          D. R. Bates, ed., Academic Press, 1962, p. 654.
    14. Chanin, Lorne M. ; and Biondi, Manfred A. : Temperature Dependence of Ion Mobi-
          lities in Helium, Neon, and Argon. Phys. Rev. vol. 106, no. 3, May 1, 1957,
          pp. 473-479.

~   NASA-Langley, 1965   E-2718                                                            59
